Now-casting the COVID-19 epidemic: The use case of Japan, March 2020
================
Stephan Glöckner (<Stephan.Gloeckner@helmholtz-hzi.de>), Gérard Krause
(<Gerard.Krause@helmholtz-hzi.de>) , Michael Höhle (<hoehle@math.su.se>)
23 March, 2020

This is the github repository for the paper: Glöckner, Krause & Höhle
(“2020).”Now-casting the COVID-19 epidemic: The use case of Japan,
March 2020". medRxiv 2020.03.18.20037473; doi:
<https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.18.20037473> or
[Link](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.18.20037473v1)

Code and Data can be found in this repository.

## Abstract

### Background

Reporting delays in disease surveillance impair the ability to assess
the current dynamic of an epidemic. In continuously updated epidemic
curves, case numbers for the most recent epidemic week or day usually
appear to be lower than the previous, suggesting a decline of the
epidemic. In reality, the epidemic curve may still be on the rise,
because reporting delay prevents the most recent cases to appear in the
case count. In context of the COVID-19 epidemic and for countries
planning large international gatherings, such as the Summer Olympic
Games in Japan 2020, the ability to assess the actual stage of an
epidemic is of outmost importance.

### Methods

We applied now-casting onto COVID-19 data provided by the nCoV-2019 Data
Working Group to evaluate the true count of cases, by taking into
account reporting delays occurring between date of symptom onset and
date of confirmation.

### Findings

We calculated a decrease of reporting delay, from a median delay of ten
days in calendar week four 2020 to six days in calendar week eight,
resulting in an overall mean of 4.3 days. The confidence intervals of
the now-casting indicated an increase of cases in the last reporting
days, while case country in that same time period suggested a decline.

### Interpretation

As a specific use case this tool may be of particular value for the
challenging risk assessment and risk communication in the context of the
Summer Olympic Games in Japan 2020 and similar situations elsewhere.

<img src="figures/readme_nowcast.PNG" width="1564" />
